doc/building.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026, Bayerische Motoren Werke Aktiengesellschaft (BMW AG)
SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
-->

# Building

This document provides detailed build instructions for all supported platforms.

> **📋 Dependency Reference:** All package names for each platform are defined in
> [`.github/dependencies.yml`](../.github/dependencies.yml) — the single source of truth
> used by both CI pipelines and this documentation.

## Prerequisites

### Compiler Requirements

| Platform | Minimum Compiler            |
| -------- | --------------------------- |
| Linux    | GCC 9+ or Clang 10+         |
| Windows  | MSVC 2019 (v142) or later   |
| macOS    | Xcode 12+ (Apple Clang 12+) |

### Required Tools

- **CMake** 3.16 or later
- **Git** (for cloning and submodules)
- **Doxygen** (optional, for documentation)
- **pkg-config** (Linux, required when not using vcpkg to locate LZ4/ZSTD)

## Installation Methods

This project supports two methods for dependency management:

- **Option A: vcpkg (Recommended)** - Automatic dependency management
- **Option B: Manual** - System package managers or manual installation

## Build Policy and Linkage Expectations

Build/test policy in this repository:

- `base` (manual/system packages) is a compatibility path and CI smoke-check, not the preferred packaging path.
- `vcpkg` (Linux/macOS) and `vcpkg-windows-static-md` (Windows) are the preferred paths for reproducible, redistribution-friendly builds.

Linkage expectations:

| Configuration                          | Intent                                       | Protobuf expectation |
| -------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| `base` + system packages (Linux)       | Compatibility validation                     | Often shared (`.so`) |
| `vcpkg` (Linux/macOS)                  | Preferred/release-oriented dependency model  | Static (`.a`)        |
| `vcpkg-windows-static-md` (Windows)    | Preferred Windows static libs + dynamic CRT  | Static triplet model |

---

## Documentation (Doxygen)

Documentation is generated by a CMake target named `library_api_doc`. It is
not part of the default build; enable it with `BUILD_DOCS=ON`. For a docs-only
configuration (skips library, examples, and tests), use `OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY=ON`.

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
cmake --preset base -DBUILD_DOCS=ON
cmake --build --preset base --target library_api_doc
```

Generated HTML is written to `doc/html/index.html`.

If you use vcpkg, install docs tools with the `docs` feature
(for example, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=docs`).

---

## Linux

### Option A (Linux): Using vcpkg (Recommended)

#### (Linux) 1. Install Build Tools

**Debian/Ubuntu:**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.vcpkg_host.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo apt install -y
```

**Fedora/RHEL:**

```bash
sudo dnf install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.vcpkg_host.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

When using vcpkg, avoid installing system protobuf/lz4/zstd packages to prevent mixing toolchains. vcpkg will provide those dependencies.

Optional extras:

```bash
# Docs tools
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo apt install -y

# Docs tools (dnf)
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

#### (Linux) 2. Install vcpkg

```bash
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg ~/vcpkg
~/vcpkg/bootstrap-vcpkg.sh
echo 'export VCPKG_ROOT="$HOME/vcpkg"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

#### (Linux) 3. Clone and Build

```bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/Lichtblick-Suite/asam-osi-utilities.git
cd asam-osi-utilities
cmake --preset vcpkg
cmake --build --preset vcpkg --parallel $(nproc)
```

#### (Linux) 4. Run Tests

Configure with `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` first (for vcpkg, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`).

```bash
ctest --test-dir build-vcpkg --output-on-failure -j$(nproc)
```

### Option B (Linux): Manual Dependencies

#### (Linux) 1. Install All Dependencies

**Debian/Ubuntu:**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.build.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo apt install -y
```

**Fedora/RHEL:**

```bash
sudo dnf install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.build.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

Optional extras:

```bash
# Test dependencies
yq -r '.dependencies.test.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo apt install -y
yq -r '.dependencies.test.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo dnf install -y

# Docs tools
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo apt install -y
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

#### (Linux) 2. Clone and Build

```bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/Lichtblick-Suite/asam-osi-utilities.git
cd asam-osi-utilities
cmake --preset base
cmake --build --preset base --parallel $(nproc)
```

---

## Windows

### Option A (Windows): Using vcpkg (Recommended)

#### (Windows) 1. Install Build Tools

Using `winget` (Windows Package Manager):

> **Note:** If `winget` fails while searching the `msstore` source (e.g. certificate/proxy issues),
> force the community repository with `--source winget` or disable the store source:
>
> - `winget source disable msstore`
> - Then re-run the install command.

```powershell
# PowerShell 7 (recommended for vcpkg)
winget install --id Microsoft.PowerShell --source winget

# yq (used to read .github/dependencies.yml)
winget install --id MikeFarah.yq --source winget

# Install from .github/dependencies.yml
yq -r '.dependencies.vcpkg_host.winget | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml |
    ForEach-Object { winget install --id $_ --source winget }

# Visual Studio 2022 Build Tools (workload override)
winget install --id Microsoft.VisualStudio.2022.BuildTools --source winget `
    --override "--add Microsoft.VisualStudio.Workload.VCTools --includeRecommended"
```

> **Note:** Open a new terminal after installation to pick up PATH changes.

> **Graphviz on Windows (troubleshooting):** `dot.exe` must be runnable for Doxygen diagrams.
> Verify in PowerShell: `dot -V`.
>
> If `dot -V` works in PowerShell but fails in Git Bash/MSYS with an error like
> `error while loading shared libraries` and a missing `libltdl-7.dll`, install MSYS2 and the
> missing runtime, then add the MinGW runtime folder to your PATH:
>
> - Install MSYS2: `winget install --id MSYS2.MSYS2 --source winget`
> - In the **MSYS2 MinGW x64** shell:
>   - `pacman -Syu`
>   - `pacman -S --needed mingw-w64-x86_64-libtool`
> - Add `C:\msys64\mingw64\bin` to PATH (or copy `libltdl-7.dll` next to `dot.exe`).

Optional docs tools:

```powershell
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.winget | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml |
    ForEach-Object { winget install --id $_ --source winget }
```

#### (Windows) 2. Install vcpkg

```powershell
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg C:\vcpkg
C:\vcpkg\bootstrap-vcpkg.bat
[System.Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable('VCPKG_ROOT', 'C:\vcpkg', 'User')
```

Open a new terminal to pick up the environment variable.

#### (Windows) 3. Clone and Build

```powershell
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/Lichtblick-Suite/asam-osi-utilities.git
cd asam-osi-utilities
cmake --preset vcpkg-windows-static-md
cmake --build --preset vcpkg-windows-static-md --parallel
```

#### (Windows) 4. Run Tests

Configure with `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` first (for vcpkg, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`).

```powershell
ctest --test-dir build-vcpkg -C Release --output-on-failure
```

### Option B (Windows): Manual Dependencies

Manual dependency installation on Windows without vcpkg is significantly more complex and **not recommended**. You would need to:

1. Build protobuf from source
2. Build lz4 from source
3. Build zstd from source
4. Build googletest from source
5. Configure CMake to find all libraries

If you must use this approach, consider using [Conan](https://conan.io/) or building with CMake's FetchContent.

---

## macOS

macOS builds are supported **only via vcpkg**. Homebrew/system dependency builds
are not supported.

Follow the Linux vcpkg instructions:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg ~/vcpkg
~/vcpkg/bootstrap-vcpkg.sh
export VCPKG_ROOT="$HOME/vcpkg"
cmake --preset vcpkg
cmake --build --preset vcpkg --parallel $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu)
```

Configure with `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` first (for vcpkg, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`).

---

## CMake Presets

The project includes CMake presets for common configurations:

| Preset                     | Description                                                                  |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `base`                     | Standard build without vcpkg (manual dependencies needed)                    |
| `vcpkg`                    | Build with vcpkg (`VCPKG_ROOT` required), preferred on Linux/macOS           |
| `vcpkg-windows-static-md`  | Windows vcpkg build with static libraries and dynamic MSVC runtime           |

Use presets with:

```bash
cmake --preset <preset-name>
cmake --build --preset <preset-name>
```

---

## CMake Options

| Option                   | Default | Description                                                        |
| ------------------------ | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `BUILD_EXAMPLES`         | `ON`    | Build example programs                                             |
| `BUILD_DOCS`             | `OFF`   | Enable the `library_api_doc` target                                |
| `OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY` | `OFF`   | Build docs only (implies `BUILD_DOCS=ON`, disables tests/examples) |
| `BUILD_TESTING`          | `OFF`   | Build unit tests                                                   |
| `OSIUTILITIES_RUN_TESTS` | `OFF`   | Run tests as part of the default build (implies `BUILD_TESTING`)   |
| `CODE_COVERAGE`          | `OFF`   | Enable code coverage (GCC only)                                    |

Example:

```bash
cmake --preset base -DBUILD_EXAMPLES=OFF -DBUILD_TESTING=ON
```

When using vcpkg and `BUILD_TESTING=ON`, enable the `tests` manifest feature
(for example, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`) to install GTest.

Dependency mapping (system packages vs vcpkg):

- Default build (`BUILD_DOCS=OFF`, `BUILD_TESTING=OFF`): `dependencies.build.*` or `dependencies.vcpkg_host.*`
- Tests (`BUILD_TESTING=ON` or `OSIUTILITIES_RUN_TESTS=ON`): add `dependencies.test.*` or vcpkg `tests` feature
- Docs (`BUILD_DOCS=ON` or `OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY=ON`): add `dependencies.docs.*` or vcpkg `docs` feature

---

## Troubleshooting

### vcpkg: First Build is Slow

The first build with vcpkg takes 10-15 minutes because it compiles protobuf, abseil, and other dependencies from source. Subsequent builds use vcpkg's binary cache.

### vcpkg: Configure Fails on Windows

If cmake configure fails, try:

1. Delete the `build` folder completely
2. Open a new terminal (ensure `VCPKG_ROOT` is set)
3. Run cmake configure again

```powershell
Remove-Item -Recurse -Force build-vcpkg
cmake --preset vcpkg-windows-static-md
```

### Corporate Proxy Issues

If vcpkg downloads fail behind a proxy:

**Windows:**

```powershell
netsh winhttp import proxy source=ie
```

**Linux/macOS:**

```bash
export HTTP_PROXY=http://proxy:port
export HTTPS_PROXY=http://proxy:port
```

### Protobuf Version Mismatch

If you see protobuf-related errors, ensure you're not mixing system protobuf with vcpkg protobuf. Use one method consistently.

### Submodules Not Initialized

If you see missing file errors:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

---

## Next Steps

- [Development Setup](development.md) - Configure your development environment
- [Examples](../examples/README.md) - Learn how to use the library

Commit message:

docs: align repo links and refine PR/docs guidance (#30)
- replace GitHub URLs with canonical  org path
- update PR template and AGENTS rules for consistent PR bodies
- remove issue-specific audit doc from user documentation index
- clarify Windows guidance:  default for executables, static-md optional for packaging

Signed-off-by: jdsika <carlo.van-driesten@bmw.de>

doc/building.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026, Bayerische Motoren Werke Aktiengesellschaft (BMW AG)
SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
-->

# Building

This document provides detailed build instructions for all supported platforms.

> **📋 Dependency Reference:** All package names for each platform are defined in
> [`.github/dependencies.yml`](../.github/dependencies.yml) — the single source of truth
> used by both CI pipelines and this documentation.

## Prerequisites

### Compiler Requirements

| Platform | Minimum Compiler            |
| -------- | --------------------------- |
| Linux    | GCC 9+ or Clang 10+         |
| Windows  | MSVC 2019 (v142) or later   |
| macOS    | Xcode 12+ (Apple Clang 12+) |

### Required Tools

- **CMake** 3.16 or later
- **Git** (for cloning and submodules)
- **Doxygen** (optional, for documentation)
- **pkg-config** (Linux, required when not using vcpkg to locate LZ4/ZSTD)

## Installation Methods

This project supports two methods for dependency management:

- **Option A: vcpkg (Recommended)** - Automatic dependency management
- **Option B: Manual** - System package managers or manual installation

## Build Policy and Linkage Expectations

Build/test policy in this repository:

- `base` (manual/system packages) is a compatibility path and CI smoke-check, not the preferred packaging path.
- `vcpkg` is the recommended default on Linux/macOS and the standard path on Windows for executable-focused development.
- `vcpkg-windows-static-md` is an optional Windows preset for packaging scenarios that prefer static libraries with dynamic MSVC runtime.

Linkage expectations:

| Configuration                          | Intent                                       | Protobuf expectation |
| -------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| `base` + system packages (Linux)       | Compatibility validation                     | Often shared (`.so`) |
| `vcpkg` (Linux/macOS)                  | Preferred/release-oriented dependency model  | Static (`.a`)        |
| `vcpkg` (Windows)                      | General executable-focused development       | Triplet-dependent    |
| `vcpkg-windows-static-md` (Windows)    | Packaging/static-linkage-oriented workflows  | Static triplet model |

---

## Documentation (Doxygen)

Documentation is generated by a CMake target named `library_api_doc`. It is
not part of the default build; enable it with `BUILD_DOCS=ON`. For a docs-only
configuration (skips library, examples, and tests), use `OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY=ON`.

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
cmake --preset base -DBUILD_DOCS=ON
cmake --build --preset base --target library_api_doc
```

Generated HTML is written to `doc/html/index.html`.

If you use vcpkg, install docs tools with the `docs` feature
(for example, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=docs`).

---

## Linux

### Option A (Linux): Using vcpkg (Recommended)

#### (Linux) 1. Install Build Tools

**Debian/Ubuntu:**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.vcpkg_host.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo apt install -y
```

**Fedora/RHEL:**

```bash
sudo dnf install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.vcpkg_host.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

When using vcpkg, avoid installing system protobuf/lz4/zstd packages to prevent mixing toolchains. vcpkg will provide those dependencies.

Optional extras:

```bash
# Docs tools
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo apt install -y

# Docs tools (dnf)
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

#### (Linux) 2. Install vcpkg

```bash
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg ~/vcpkg
~/vcpkg/bootstrap-vcpkg.sh
echo 'export VCPKG_ROOT="$HOME/vcpkg"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

#### (Linux) 3. Clone and Build

```bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/lichtblick-suite/asam-osi-utilities.git
cd asam-osi-utilities
cmake --preset vcpkg
cmake --build --preset vcpkg --parallel $(nproc)
```

#### (Linux) 4. Run Tests

Configure with `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` first (for vcpkg, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`).

```bash
ctest --test-dir build-vcpkg --output-on-failure -j$(nproc)
```

### Option B (Linux): Manual Dependencies

#### (Linux) 1. Install All Dependencies

**Debian/Ubuntu:**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.build.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo apt install -y
```

**Fedora/RHEL:**

```bash
sudo dnf install -y yq
yq -r '.dependencies.build.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | \
    xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

Optional extras:

```bash
# Test dependencies
yq -r '.dependencies.test.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo apt install -y
yq -r '.dependencies.test.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo dnf install -y

# Docs tools
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.apt | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo apt install -y
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.dnf | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml | xargs sudo dnf install -y
```

#### (Linux) 2. Clone and Build

```bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/lichtblick-suite/asam-osi-utilities.git
cd asam-osi-utilities
cmake --preset base
cmake --build --preset base --parallel $(nproc)
```

---

## Windows

### Option A (Windows): Using vcpkg (Recommended)

#### (Windows) 1. Install Build Tools

Using `winget` (Windows Package Manager):

> **Note:** If `winget` fails while searching the `msstore` source (e.g. certificate/proxy issues),
> force the community repository with `--source winget` or disable the store source:
>
> - `winget source disable msstore`
> - Then re-run the install command.

```powershell
# PowerShell 7 (recommended for vcpkg)
winget install --id Microsoft.PowerShell --source winget

# yq (used to read .github/dependencies.yml)
winget install --id MikeFarah.yq --source winget

# Install from .github/dependencies.yml
yq -r '.dependencies.vcpkg_host.winget | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml |
    ForEach-Object { winget install --id $_ --source winget }

# Visual Studio 2022 Build Tools (workload override)
winget install --id Microsoft.VisualStudio.2022.BuildTools --source winget `
    --override "--add Microsoft.VisualStudio.Workload.VCTools --includeRecommended"
```

> **Note:** Open a new terminal after installation to pick up PATH changes.

> **Graphviz on Windows (troubleshooting):** `dot.exe` must be runnable for Doxygen diagrams.
> Verify in PowerShell: `dot -V`.
>
> If `dot -V` works in PowerShell but fails in Git Bash/MSYS with an error like
> `error while loading shared libraries` and a missing `libltdl-7.dll`, install MSYS2 and the
> missing runtime, then add the MinGW runtime folder to your PATH:
>
> - Install MSYS2: `winget install --id MSYS2.MSYS2 --source winget`
> - In the **MSYS2 MinGW x64** shell:
>   - `pacman -Syu`
>   - `pacman -S --needed mingw-w64-x86_64-libtool`
> - Add `C:\msys64\mingw64\bin` to PATH (or copy `libltdl-7.dll` next to `dot.exe`).

Optional docs tools:

```powershell
yq -r '.dependencies.docs.winget | unique | .[]' .github/dependencies.yml |
    ForEach-Object { winget install --id $_ --source winget }
```

#### (Windows) 2. Install vcpkg

```powershell
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg C:\vcpkg
C:\vcpkg\bootstrap-vcpkg.bat
[System.Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable('VCPKG_ROOT', 'C:\vcpkg', 'User')
```

Open a new terminal to pick up the environment variable.

#### (Windows) 3. Clone and Build

```powershell
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/lichtblick-suite/asam-osi-utilities.git
cd asam-osi-utilities
cmake --preset vcpkg
cmake --build --preset vcpkg --parallel
```

If you need static-library-oriented packaging behavior on Windows, use:

```powershell
cmake --preset vcpkg-windows-static-md
cmake --build --preset vcpkg-windows-static-md --parallel
```

#### (Windows) 4. Run Tests

Configure with `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` first (for vcpkg, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`).

```powershell
ctest --test-dir build-vcpkg -C Release --output-on-failure
```

### Option B (Windows): Manual Dependencies

Manual dependency installation on Windows without vcpkg is significantly more complex and **not recommended**. You would need to:

1. Build protobuf from source
2. Build lz4 from source
3. Build zstd from source
4. Build googletest from source
5. Configure CMake to find all libraries

If you must use this approach, consider using [Conan](https://conan.io/) or building with CMake's FetchContent.

---

## macOS

macOS builds are supported **only via vcpkg**. Homebrew/system dependency builds
are not supported.

Follow the Linux vcpkg instructions:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg ~/vcpkg
~/vcpkg/bootstrap-vcpkg.sh
export VCPKG_ROOT="$HOME/vcpkg"
cmake --preset vcpkg
cmake --build --preset vcpkg --parallel $(sysctl -n hw.ncpu)
```

Configure with `-DBUILD_TESTING=ON` first (for vcpkg, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`).

---

## CMake Presets

The project includes CMake presets for common configurations:

| Preset                     | Description                                                                  |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `base`                     | Standard build without vcpkg (manual dependencies needed)                    |
| `vcpkg`                    | Build with vcpkg (`VCPKG_ROOT` required), default for Linux/macOS and common Windows executable workflows |
| `vcpkg-windows-static-md`  | Windows vcpkg build for static-library-oriented packaging with dynamic MSVC runtime |

Use presets with:

```bash
cmake --preset <preset-name>
cmake --build --preset <preset-name>
```

---

## CMake Options

| Option                   | Default | Description                                                        |
| ------------------------ | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `BUILD_EXAMPLES`         | `ON`    | Build example programs                                             |
| `BUILD_DOCS`             | `OFF`   | Enable the `library_api_doc` target                                |
| `OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY` | `OFF`   | Build docs only (implies `BUILD_DOCS=ON`, disables tests/examples) |
| `BUILD_TESTING`          | `OFF`   | Build unit tests                                                   |
| `OSIUTILITIES_RUN_TESTS` | `OFF`   | Run tests as part of the default build (implies `BUILD_TESTING`)   |
| `CODE_COVERAGE`          | `OFF`   | Enable code coverage (GCC only)                                    |

Example:

```bash
cmake --preset base -DBUILD_EXAMPLES=OFF -DBUILD_TESTING=ON
```

When using vcpkg and `BUILD_TESTING=ON`, enable the `tests` manifest feature
(for example, set `VCPKG_MANIFEST_FEATURES=tests`) to install GTest.

Dependency mapping (system packages vs vcpkg):

- Default build (`BUILD_DOCS=OFF`, `BUILD_TESTING=OFF`): `dependencies.build.*` or `dependencies.vcpkg_host.*`
- Tests (`BUILD_TESTING=ON` or `OSIUTILITIES_RUN_TESTS=ON`): add `dependencies.test.*` or vcpkg `tests` feature
- Docs (`BUILD_DOCS=ON` or `OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY=ON`): add `dependencies.docs.*` or vcpkg `docs` feature

---

## Troubleshooting

### vcpkg: First Build is Slow

The first build with vcpkg takes 10-15 minutes because it compiles protobuf, abseil, and other dependencies from source. Subsequent builds use vcpkg's binary cache.

### vcpkg: Configure Fails on Windows

If cmake configure fails, try:

1. Delete the `build` folder completely
2. Open a new terminal (ensure `VCPKG_ROOT` is set)
3. Run cmake configure again

```powershell
Remove-Item -Recurse -Force build-vcpkg
cmake --preset vcpkg
```

If you are using the static-md path, rerun configure with `cmake --preset vcpkg-windows-static-md`.

### Corporate Proxy Issues

If vcpkg downloads fail behind a proxy:

**Windows:**

```powershell
netsh winhttp import proxy source=ie
```

**Linux/macOS:**

```bash
export HTTP_PROXY=http://proxy:port
export HTTPS_PROXY=http://proxy:port
```

### Protobuf Version Mismatch

If you see protobuf-related errors, ensure you're not mixing system protobuf with vcpkg protobuf. Use one method consistently.

### Submodules Not Initialized

If you see missing file errors:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

---

## Next Steps

- [Development Setup](development.md) - Configure your development environment
- [Examples](../examples/README.md) - Learn how to use the library
