examples/README.md, before:

# Examples

This folder contains application examples that demonstrate how to use the OSI utilities library.
After build, the executables can be found in the examples folder in the build directory.

### convert_osi2mcap

This example demonstrates how to convert an OSI native binary trace file to an MCAP file.
Simply pass a .osi file and a .mcap destination file name as arguments to the executable.

```bash
./convert_osi2mcap <input_osi_file> <output_mcap_file>
```

### example_mcap_reader

This example demonstrates how to read an MCAP file into your application.
It simply prints the message types and timestamps of the OSI mcap file.
You can try it with an example mcap file generated with `example_mcap_writer` (see following section) with

```bash
./example_mcap_reader example_mcap.mcap
```

### example_mcap_writer

This example demonstrates how to write OSI data to an MCAP file from your application.
As an example, a SensorView message with one moving object is created and written to the MCAP file.
It creates the example file `example_mcap.mcap` in the temp directory of your operating system, on Linx this is `/tmp`.

```bash
./example_mcap_writer
```

### example_single_channel_binary_reader

This example demonstrates how to read a native binary trace file into your application.
It simply prints the message types and timestamps of the OSI trace file.
You can try it with an example osi trace file generated with `example_single_channel_binary_writer` (see following section) with

```bash
./example_single_channel_binary_reader /tmp/<osi-version>_<protobuf-version>_<number-of-frames>_example_single_channel_binary_writer.osi --type SensorView
```

### example_single_channel_binary_writer

This example demonstrates how to write OSI data to a native binary file from your application.
As an example, a SensorView message with one moving object is created and written to the OSI trace file.
It creates the example file `<osi-version>_<protobuf-version>_<number-of-frames>_example_single_channel_binary_writer.osi` in the temp directory of your operating system, on Linux this is `/tmp`.

```bash
./example_single_channel_binary_writer
```

### example_txth_reader

This example demonstrates how to read a human-readable txth trace file into your application.
It simply prints the message types and timestamps of the OSI trace file.
You can try it with an example osi trace file generated with `example_txth_writer` (see following section) with

```bash
./example_txth_reader /tmp/example_txth_writer.txth --type SensorView
```

### example_txth_writer

This example demonstrates how to write OSI data to a human-readable txth file from your application.
As an example, a SensorView message with one moving object is created and written to the txth file.
It creates the example file `example_txth_writer.txth` in the temp directory of your operating system, on Linux this is `/tmp`.

```bash
./example_txth_writer
```

Commit message:

feat: Add Windows build support and modernize project infrastructure (#8)
This change introduces cross-platform dependency management via vcpkg
and overhauls the build system, CI/CD pipelines, and documentation.

- Implement vcpkg manifests for Windows, Linux, and macOS support.
- Modernize CMake to use vcpkg.json as the single source of truth for versions.
- Add new build modes: OSIUTILITIES_DOCS_ONLY and OSIUTILITIES_RUN_TESTS.
- Replace legacy CI with modular, reusable GitHub Actions pipelines.
- Enhance Doxygen documentation with API headers, examples, and GitHub links.
- Update developer tooling including setup scripts and native git hooks.

Closes #18

---------

Signed-off-by: jdsika <carlo.van-driesten@bmw.de>

examples/README.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026, Bayerische Motoren Werke Aktiengesellschaft (BMW AG)
SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
-->

# Examples

This folder contains application examples that demonstrate how to use the OSI utilities library.
After build, the executables can be found in the examples folder in the build directory.

### convert_osi2mcap

This example demonstrates how to convert an OSI native binary trace file to an MCAP file.
Simply pass a .osi file and a .mcap destination file name as arguments to the executable.

```bash
./convert_osi2mcap <input_osi_file> <output_mcap_file>
```

### example_mcap_reader

This example demonstrates how to read an MCAP file into your application.
It simply prints the message types and timestamps of the OSI mcap file.
You can try it with an example mcap file generated with `example_mcap_writer` (see following section) with:

```bash
./example_mcap_reader /tmp/sv_example.mcap
```

### example_mcap_writer

This example demonstrates how to write OSI data to an MCAP file from your application.
As an example, a SensorView message with one moving object is created and written to the MCAP file.
It creates the example file `sv_example.mcap` in the temp directory of your operating system (for example, `/tmp` on Linux/macOS or `%TEMP%` on Windows).

```bash
./example_mcap_writer
```

### example_single_channel_binary_reader

This example demonstrates how to read a native binary trace file into your application.
It simply prints the message types and timestamps of the OSI trace file.
You can try it with an example osi trace file generated with `example_single_channel_binary_writer` (see following section) with:

```bash
./example_single_channel_binary_reader /tmp/<timestamp>_<osi-version>_<protobuf-version>_<number-of-frames>_example_single_channel_binary_writer.osi --type SensorView
```

### example_single_channel_binary_writer

This example demonstrates how to write OSI data to a native binary file from your application.
As an example, a SensorView message with one moving object is created and written to the OSI trace file.
It creates the example file `<timestamp>_<osi-version>_<protobuf-version>_<number-of-frames>_example_single_channel_binary_writer.osi` in the temp directory of your operating system (for example, `/tmp` on Linux/macOS or `%TEMP%` on Windows).

```bash
./example_single_channel_binary_writer
```

### example_txth_reader

This example demonstrates how to read a human-readable txth trace file into your application.
It simply prints the message types and timestamps of the OSI trace file.
You can try it with an example osi trace file generated with `example_txth_writer` (see following section) with:

```bash
./example_txth_reader /tmp/<timestamp>_<osi-version>_<protobuf-version>_<number-of-frames>_example-txth-writer.txth --type SensorView
```

### example_txth_writer

This example demonstrates how to write OSI data to a human-readable txth file from your application.
As an example, a SensorView message with one moving object is created and written to the txth file.
It creates the example file `<timestamp>_<osi-version>_<protobuf-version>_<number-of-frames>_example-txth-writer.txth` in the temp directory of your operating system (for example, `/tmp` on Linux/macOS or `%TEMP%` on Windows).

```bash
./example_txth_writer
```
